@node About, Installation, License, Top
@chapter Authors, Contact, Bugs

@menu
* LicenseExtra::                
* Submitting a Bug Report ::    
* Requesting a New Feature::    
* Praises::                     
* Contribution::                
* Reference::                   
* Authors::                     
* Contact::                     
@end menu

@node LicenseExtra
@section License? What license?

@xref{License}.

@quindex I found a bug/strange feature/some stupid mistake. What should I do?

@node Submitting a Bug Report 
@section Submitting a Bug Report 

If you find a bug or an undesireable feature or anything that is worth a
couple of lines ranting at the authors, please go ahead and
send a bugreport on the MOKK Lab bugzilla page at @value{MOKKWEB}
or send a mail to me (@pxref{Contact}).

@node Requesting a New Feature
@section Requesting a New Feature

@quindex I am using hunlex, but desparately lacking a feature X. Can I request it?

So you are using hunlex and find yourself realizing that you would need a certain 
feature desparately which happens not to be implemented. 
Go ahead and request it from the authors (@pxref{Contact}) or sit silently and hope!

@node Praises
@section Praises

@quindex I found hunlex cool/useful/useless. How can I let the authors know?

So you found hunlex cool and/or useful and would like the authors to hear about that.
How nice is that! @xref{Contact}.

@node Contribution
@section Contribution

@quindex I am a keen hacker/stupid user with sleepless nights/long afternoons at work to be wasted/spent usefully. How can I contribute to your work?

Hunlex is open source development, so developpers are welcome to
contribute to make it better in any imaginable way. Contact us
(@pxref{Contact}) to work out the details of how and what you would want
to contribute to Hunlex.

@node Reference
@section Reference 

@quindex I used hunlex and report it in a paper. What reference do I use?

For the context of the whole huntools kit, use

@verbatim
@InProceedings{szoszablya_saltmil:04,
  author =       {L\'aszl\'o N\'emeth and Viktor Tr\'on
and P\'eter Hal\'acsy and Andr\'as Kornai
and Andr\'as Rung and Istv\'an Szakad\'at},
  title =        {Leveraging the open-source ispell codebase
for minority language analysis},
  booktitle =    {Proceedings of SALTMIL 2004},
  year =         2004,
  organization = {European Language Resources Association},
  url =          {http://lab.mokk.bme.hu/}
}
@end verbatim


A very brief intro to hunlex with a one-page English resumé. 

@verbatim
@InProceedings{hunlex_mszny:04,
  author =       {Tr\'on, Viktor},
  title =        {HunLex - a description framework and
resource compilation tool for morphological dictionaries},
  booktitle =    {II. Magyar Sz\'am\'it\'og\'epes 
Nyelv\'eszeti Konferencia},
  institution =  {Szegedi Tudom\'anyegyetem},
  address =      {Szeged, Hungary}
  year =         2004
}
@end verbatim

These and other papers can be downloaded from the MOKK Lab publications page at 
@value{MOKKWEB}

@node Authors
@section Authors

@quindex Who are you? 

The author of hunlex and this document is @i{Viktor Tr@'on}. He can be mailed to on @*
@value{MYEMAIL}
@*
Hopefully more can be found on MOKK Lab's pages at @value{MOKKWEB}.

@node Contact
@section Contact

@quindex How can I contact you?

We can get in contact if you
@enumerate
@item 
Mail to @i{Viktor Trón} on @*
@value{MYEMAIL}

@item
Join the forums on @value{MOKKWEB}

@item
Submit a bug report (@pxref{Submitting a Bug Report}) or feature request (@pxref{Requesting a New Feature}).

@end enumerate



