\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename hunlex
@settitle HunLex -- Reference Manual
@set frontcontents
@ifset publish
@afourpaper
@set frontcontents
@setchapternewpage odd
@end ifset
@paragraphindent none
@c @firstparagraphindent none 
@documentlanguage en
@documentencoding ISO-8859-2
@c %**end of header

@tex
\tolerance=2000000
\vbadness=10000
\hbadness=1000000
@end tex

@dircategory Hunlex examples
@direntry
* texinfo: (Hunlex)                  Hunlex Reference
@end direntry

               
@set HUNLEX @i{the HunLex morphological resource specification framework and precompilation tool}
@set VERSION 0.1
@set EDITION draft for release candidate for pre-beta version @value{VERSION}
@set MOKKWEB @uref{http://lab.mokk.bme.hu}
@set MORPHDBWEB @uref{http://lab.mokk.bme.hu}
@set MYEMAIL @email{v.tron@@ed.ac.uk}
                        
@ignore                             
@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2005 Viktor Tr@'on

This document is licensed under the @i{Creative Commons Attribution License}. To
view a copy of this license, visit
@uref{http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/} or send a letter to
Creative Commons, 559 Nathan Abbott Way, Stanford, California 94305,
USA.

@ifclear publish
Printed copies of this manual can be purchased from the MOKK Lab
at@* @value{MOKKWEB}
@end ifclear
@end copying
@end ignore

@titlepage
@title HunLex 
@subtitle Morphological resource title specification framework 
@subtitle and title precompilation tool
@subtitle Reference Manual
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}
                                                                                
@author Viktor Tr@'on
IGK, Language Technology and Cognitive Systems. Universities of Edinburgh & Saarbrücken.
MOKK Lab, Budapest Intitute of Technology. Budapest.
@value{MYEMAIL}
@sp 1
                                                                              
This file documents @value{HUNLEX} (HunLex). It corresponds to release
@value{VERSION} of the the Hunlex distribution.
                                                                                
More information about Hunlex can be found at the MOKK Lab homepage,
@value{MOKKWEB}.

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c @ifset frontcontents
@contents
@c @end ifset
                                                                                
@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Hunlex Reference Manual
@c @insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c define indices 
@c keywords
@defindex kw
@c files
@defindex fi
@c options, not vr
@defindex op
@c questions for the FAQ
@defindex qu

@menu
* Introduction::                
* License::                     
* About::                       
* Installation::                
* Bootstrapping::               
* Toplevel Control::            
* Description Language::        
* Files::                       
* Command-line Control::        
* Levels::                      
* Tags::                        
* Flags::                       
* Troubleshooting::             
* Related Software and Resources::  
* Variables and Options Index::  
* Description Language Index::  
* Files Index::                 
* Concept Index::               
* Frequently Asked Questions::  
@end menu

@include introduction.texi
@include license.texi
@include about.texi
@include installation.texi
@include bootstrapping.texi
@include toplevel.texi
@include description_language.texi
@include files.texi
@include command-line_control.texi
@include levels.texi
@include tags.texi
@include flags.texi
@include troubleshooting.texi
@include related_software.texi

@include vrindex.texi
@include kwindex.texi
@include fiindex.texi
@include cpindex.texi
@include quindex.texi

@ifclear frontcontents
@comment Use @setchapternewpage odd to ensure that the contents starts
@comment on an odd page so that it can always be moved to the front when
@comment printing two-up.
@setchapternewpage odd
@contents
@end ifclear

@bye
