@node Installation, Bootstrapping, About, Top
@chapter Installation 

@quindex What do I want to install?

So you want to install the hunlex toolkit (@pxref{Introduction}) from
the hunlex source distribution.  This document describes what and how
you can install with this distribution.

@quindex What is Hunlex?

@menu
* Download::                    
* Supported Platforms::         
* Prerequisites::
* Install::                     
* Uninstall and Reinstall::     
* Installed Files::             
@end menu

@node Download
@section Download

@quindex Where can I find the sources?

The latest version of the hunlex source distribution is always available
from the MOKK LAB website at @value{MOKKWEB} or, if all else fails, by
mailing to me @value{MYEMAIL}.

@node Supported Platforms
@section Supported Platforms

@quindex What platforms are supported by Hunlex?

The hunlex executable in principle runs on any platform for which there
is an @code{ocaml} compiler (@pxref{Prerequisites}). This includes
all Linuxes, unices, MS Windows, etc.  

@quotation
@strong{Warning:}
This package has not been tested on platforms other than linux.
@end quotation

@node Prerequisites
@section Prerequisites

@quindex What do I need if I want to install this package?

@deffn Prerequisite {ocaml}
@cindex ocaml

Hunlex is written in the @dfn{ocaml} programming language
@uref{http://www.ocaml.org/}.  OCaml compilers are extremely easy to
install and are available for various platforms and downloadable in various
package formats for free from @uref{http://caml.inria.fr/ocaml/distrib.html}.

You will need @command{ocaml} version >=3.08 to compile hunlex.
@end deffn

@deffn Prerequisite {ocaml-make} 
@strong{ocaml-make}
@cindex ocaml-make
@cindex OCamlMakefile

@file{OCamlMakefile} (i.e., @code{ocaml-make}) is needed for the installation of
hunlex and is available from Markus Mottl's homepage at @*
@uref{http://www.ai.univie.ac.at/~markus/home/ocaml_sources.html#OCamlMakefile}
@*
(I used version 6.19. writing on 8.1.2004).

@cindex make, GNU

For @file{OCamlMakefile} you will need ocaml and @samp{GNU make}.
(for @samp{ocaml-make} version 6.19 you will need @samp{GNU make} version >= 3.80)

@quotation 
@strong{NB:}
Most probably earlier versions of @code{ocaml-make} and @code{GNU make}
should also work but have not been tested yet.
@end quotation

@end deffn

You don't need anything else to use hunlex (but a little patience).

@node Install
@section Install

@quindex How do I install the hunlex?
@cindex make, hunlex installation
@cindex Makefile, hunlex installation

Hunlex is installed in the good old way, i.e., by typing 

@example
$ make && sudo make install
@end example 

in the toplevel directory of the unpacked distribution.
Read no further if you know what I am talking about or if you trust some God.

The hunlex distribution is available in a source tarball called @file{hunlex.tgz}.
First you have to unpack it by typing  

@example
$ tar xzvf hunlex.tgz
@end example

Then, you enter the toplevel directory of the unpacked distribution with
@example
$ cd hunlex
@end example

To compile it, simply type

@example
$ make
@end example 

in the toplevel directory of the distribution.

To install it (on what gets installed, @pxref{Installed Files}), type

@example
$ make install
@end example

Well, by default this would want to install things under @file{/usr/local}, so
you have to have admin permissions. If you are not root but you are in the
sudoers file with the appropriate rights, you type:

@example 
$ sudo make install
@end example

You can change the location of the installation by changing the install prefix path with 

@example
$ sudo make @env{PREFIX}=@file{/my/favourite/path} install
@end example

Changing the location of installation for individual install targets
individually is not recommended but easy-peasy if you have a clue about
@samp{make} and @file{Makefile}-s.  To do this you have to change the relevant
@file{Makefile}-s in the subdirectories of the distribution.
@xref{Installed Files}.

If it works, great! Go ahead to @ref{Bootstrapping}.

If you have problems, doubleckeck that you have the prerequisites
(@pxref{Prerequisites}). If you think you followed the instructions
but still have problems, submit a bug report (@pxref{Submitting a Bug Report}).

If you are upgrading an earlier version of hunlex, you may want to
@i{uninstall} the earlier one first (@pxref{Uninstall and Reinstall}).

@node Uninstall and Reinstall
@section Uninstall and Reinstall

@quindex How do I uninstall hunlex?
@quindex How do I upgrade hunlex?
@quindex How do I reinstall hunlex?

The install prefix is remembered in the source distribution in the file
@file{install_prefix}. So after you @code{cd} into the toplevel directory of the distribution,
you can uninstall hunlex by typing

@fiindex install_prefix

@example
$ make uninstall
@end example

You can reinstall it with

@example
$ make reinstall 
@end example

at any time if you make modifications to the code or compile options.

@c ref to changing keywords, maybe

@quotation
@strong{Warning:}
Note that if you fiddle with changing the location of individual install targets, uninstall
and resinstall will not work correctly.
@end quotation


@node Installed Files
@section Installed Files

@quindex What gets installed when I install hunlex?

The following files and directories are installed, paths are relative to
the @i{install prefix} (@pxref{Install}):

@itemize

@item
@file{bin/hunlex}

the executable which can be run on the command line (@pxref{Command-line Control})
@fiindex hunlex

@item
@file{lib/HunlexMakefile} 

is the @file{Makefile} that defines the
toplevel control of hunlex (@pxref{Toplevel Control}). This file is to
be @samp{include}-ed into your @i{local} @file{Makefile} to give you a
@samp{Makefile}-style wrapper for calling hunlex (see
@ref{Bootstrapping} and @ref{Toplevel Control}). 

@fiindex HunlexMakefile
@fiindex Makefile, hunlex toplevel

Note that @file{HunlexMakefile} will assume that the hunlex executable
is found in your path. Make sure that @var{install-prefix}@file{/bin} is
in the path (usually @file{/usr/local/bin} @i{is} in the @env{PATH}.

@item
@file{share/doc/hunlex//}

is a directory containing hunlex documentation. Various documents in various formats
are found under this directory including a replica of this document.

TODO: this is not yet the case

@item
@file{man/hunlex.1}

@fiindex hunlex.1

is the hunlex man page describes the command-line use of hunlex (also
@pxref{Command-line Control}. Command-line use of hunlex is not the
recommended way of using it for the general user.  Instead, use hunlex
through the toplevel control described in a chapter (@pxref{Toplevel
Control}).

@quotation
@strong{Todo:}
there is no man page yet
@end quotation

@end itemize


