@node Related Software and Resources, Variables and Options Index, Troubleshooting, Top
@chapter Related Software and Resources

@menu
* Software that can use the output of Hunlex as input::  
* Available resources::         
* Hunlex's relatives::          
@end menu

@node Software that can use the output of Hunlex as input
@section Software that can use the output of Hunlex as input

@quindex Which softwares can use the output of Hunlex?

@menu
* Huntools::                    
* Myspell::                     
* Jmorph::                      
* Ispell::                      
@end menu

@node Huntools
@subsection Huntools

@quindex Can you recommend a spellchecker?
@quindex Can you recommend a stemmer?
@quindex Can you recommend a morphological analyzer?

@node Myspell
@subsection Myspell

@node Jmorph
@subsection Jmorph

@quindex Can you recommend a morphological analyzer?

@node Ispell
@subsection Ispell


@node Available resources
@section Available resources

@quindex Are there any Hunlex resources available for any language?

@menu
* The Hungarian Morphdb Project::  
* The English Morphdb Project::  
@end menu

@node The Hungarian Morphdb Project
@subsection The Hungarian Morphdb Project

The HunLex framework is being used in the development of an open-source
morphological database (lexicon and grammar) for the Hungarian language
in a collaboration between the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Research
Institute for Linguistics and the Budapest Institute of Technology,
Media Education and Research Center Natural Language Processing Lab.
This database aspires to be the most complete and accurate account of
Hungarian morphology published so far, and is the result of merging
several well-respected electronic resources @value{MORPHDBWEB}.

@node The English Morphdb Project
@subsection The English Morphdb Project



@node Hunlex's relatives
@section Hunlex's relatives

@menu
* XFST etc.::                   
@end menu


@node XFST etc.
@subsection XFST, TWOLC, LEXC

@quindex Are there software with similar functionality?

For @code{xfst, twolc, lexc}, see 

@uref{http://www.xrce.xerox.com/competencies/content-analysis/fst/home.en.html}

or

@uref{http://www.stanford.edu/~laurik/fsmbook/home.html}


