@node Troubleshooting, Related Software and Resources, Flags, Top
@chapter Troubleshooting


@menu
* Installation Problems::       
* Problems running hunlex::     
* Resource Compilation Problems::  
* Grammar Problems::            
@end menu

@node Installation Problems
@section Installation Problems

If hunlex wouldn't install, check @ref{Prerequisites} carefully with special attention to
the versions.

There are some hints hidden among the lines of @ref{Install} which you may have missed.

@node Problems running hunlex
@section Problems running hunlex

If you upgraded from an earlier version, make sure you uninstall the earlier version first (@pxref{Uninstall and Reinstall}).

If you use hunlex trhough the toplevel control with @file{Makefile}
(@pxref{Toplevel Control}), the hunlex executable is by default assumed
to be found in the path with name @file{hunlex}.

By default, installation installs hunlex into @file{/usr/local/bin}
(@pxref{Installed Files}) unless you set another install prefix.  

Find out whether the hunlex executable is found in the path by typing

@example
$ which hunlex
@end example

If it is not found, check again where you installed it by looking into
the file @file{install_prefix} in the toplevel directory of your source distribution.
If this file is not there, your installation was not successful. 

If you found out your @var{install-prefix}, see if @var{install-prefix}@file{/bin/hunlex} exists.
If it does, you can do the following things:

@itemize
@item
add @var{install-prefix}@file{/bin/hunlex}
to your path by something like:

@example 
@env{PATH}=@var{install-prefix}@file{/bin}:$@{PATH@}
@end example

or 
@item 
tell the toplevel where to find your hunlex.
This you can do by setting the @env{HUNLEX} toplevel option (@pxref{Options}).
@end itemize


@node Resource Compilation Problems
@section Resource Compilation Problems


@node Grammar Problems
@section Grammar Problems

If your grammar seems to overgenerate, first thing is check if you
declared the features that you think your grammar is relying on in the
phono.conf file.

You may have mispelled some phonofeature, this can be traced by peeping
into the debug messages. Ideally you do this by redirecting the output
into a log file (with debug level set sufficiently high) and search the
file for the term 'skipped'.  This is the warning hunlex gives you to
let you know that an entity has been skipped.
